[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Have
you heard the phrase,
you can create your own reality,
or the law of attraction?
What does that really mean
on a quantum physics level?
As fast as the
world is changing,
wouldn't it be helpful to
learn new ways of thinking
and how to think
on a quantum level?
Joining me to break this
down in relatable terms
is physicist Dr. Fred Alan Wolf.
Dr. Quantum, as he's
affectionately called,
he has the unique ability to
communicate the complex topics
of quantum physics into
more understandable terms,
as he did with the movie
"What the Bleep Do We Know!?"
Welcome.
Thank you so much
for joining me.
>>FRED ALAN WOLF:
Thank you, Lisa.
It's a pleasure to
be on this show.
Your show.
[LAUGH]
>>LISA: Well, I'm really
excited to have you here.
So can you tell us how
quantum physics can
help us understand the rapid
changes that we're experiencing
in the world today?
Help us cope with it
a little bit better.
>>WOLF: OK.
I'll try.
First of all, we have to try
to grasp, what is this thing
called quantum physics?
So if you don't mind, I'm going
to paint a kind of picture.
Tell you a little bit of a
story, if that's OK with you.
>>LISA: Please.
>>WOLF: All right.
In the beginning, when we
first came out of the caves
and the uga-boogas were all
around us, we needed something.
We were afraid.
I mean, we were going to be--
>>LISA: Survival.
Yes.
>>WOLF: Yes.
So we started trying
to figure out,
what is this thing we're in,
this nature that we're in?
And as the years went by,
we began to see, well,
we can control fire.
We can control air.
We can control water.
We began to learn about the
nature of things by the things
that we could get our mitts
on, how we control them.
Well, now we're going to
jump thousands of years.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: And as we jump
thousands of years,
we get into a kind of
mechanical world view.
And this is a world
view in which everything
is viewed as being mechanical.
Everything is a machine.
We have a little bit
of that even today,
in today's thinking, which I
don't necessarily subscribe to.
But nevertheless,
that was the thinking
during the time of Newton
and Galileo and Bruno,
and a number of
people who were around
during this period of time.
Descartes.
I won't get into all that.
But all I want to
get into with you
is the idea that since
everything was a machine,
we looked at things
mechanically.
And what do you
do with machines?
Well, you take them
apart, and you put them
back together again.
So the whole thing
is, can we take apart
the universe or the
things we have around us
and put them back
together again?
And the answer is, pretty well.
We did very well until about
the turn of the 20th century.
Then we began taking
things apart so well
that when we tried to put
them back together again,
they didn't fit.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>WOLF: Nothing made any sense.
We needed a kind of
new physics, a new way
to bring things
back together again.
And that gave us
some way of thinking,
a new way of thinking.
Well, what are we
actually trying
to build in the first place?
What are the things
we've taken apart?
What are the things we're trying
to put back together again?
And what arose from all
that was a picture of things
being atoms and molecules
and then electrons.
And then we began to even take
apart the nucleus of atoms.
And now we have pictures
of quarks and anti-quarks
and gluons.
>>LISA: Yes.
[LAUGH]
It's amazing.
>>WOLF: We're so much
into thingyness, so much
into taking things apart,
so much into things
have to be really thingy.
But quantum physics keeps going
and waving its finger at us
to say, (SINGING) na,
na, na, na, na, na, you
don't have it right yet.
And that seems to be the
case, because it's not
a question of thingyness.
It's more a question of mind.
And we're beginning to see
what quantum physics is
telling us is that things
are not made of things.
They're made of what we
think they are made of.
In other words, what we
think things are made of,
trying to build a picture which
is consistent with what we more
or less think we
understand leads us
into the whole picture
of pictures of atoms
as being little marbles.
But they're not.
>>LISA: I like that
so much better,
because you say
you like machines
to take apart and put
back together again,
and scientists do that.
I'm the type of
person that wants
to push it and make it work.
I just want it to work.
[LAUGH]
And a lot of the world's
like that, especially
now in this day and age.
So it's interesting, because
there's a combination of two.
Pushing it and make it work
is kind of the quantum.
>>WOLF: Well, underlying
the technology of today,
including the filming
of this show--
but the word filming is no
longer the right word anymore.
Everything that's
been done is done
in terms of kind of
pictures that are really not
pictures or dots, pixels.
And we're getting into the whole
idea of quantum dots, quantum
pictures.
Everything has been pixelated
into small and small, small
and smaller things.
And again, we're dealing
with no longer thinking this
as much as we are with idea-like
substance, idea-like things.
They're not really things,
but idea-like things,
which turn into virtual
reality, television
shows right now where the
picture you see on the screen
is even brighter than the
picture you see when you
walk outside of your own house.
>>LISA: Yes
>>WOLF: And it's just
amazing how we are
into creating our own reality.
And this is where the
quantum physics has led us.
As soon as we began to
realize what it was telling us
and we began to let go of
marbles and billiard balls
or whatever-- which are OK if
you're playing with marbles
and billiard balls.
But while we're playing
with pictures and ideas
and intelligence and
artificial intelligence
and the kind of pixellation that
goes into making a television
show like this one,
we're no longer
dealing with marbles
and billiard balls.
And this is where the
quantum comes into view,
and this is what
makes your desire
to have it come
into view by pushing
that button become what it is.
>>LISA: Makes it happen.
>>WOLF: I mean, we're
all becoming like--
[LAUGH]
This is a picture I
had the other day.
We're like blobs.
We're big blobs,
and we have a thumb.
And the thumb is on a screen.
We press the screen,
and the pictures appear,
and the blob goes--
[SPEAKING NONSENSE]
That's great.
I like that.
And we press the button again.
Oh, now I don't like that.
I'll press the button again.
And everything is
changing because we're
controlling our reality.
So we're learning more and
more from our technology
what it means to
create our own reality.
>>LISA: This is such great news.
This is such great news from a
physicist that what we're doing
is working now.
And we can work with
it more than ever.
>>WOLF: And we're
just at the bottom
rung of what that means to
create your own reality.
Physicists could see it
happening in experiments
that they did, but
these were experiments.
These were very technical,
very difficult to explain
in a layman's term.
But basically, it
is the same thing.
It is creating your own reality,
and we saw it happening.
In fact, we no longer
have pictures--
I mean, when we deal
with quantum physics,
we're not dealing, as I said
before, we're thingyness.
We're dealing with
idea-like things.
>>LISA: Concepts, right?
>>WOLF: Concepts.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: Right.
>>LISA: So if you're
in a situation-- say
you're going down
a specific track
or there's things that are
happening in your life,
you don't necessarily like them,
can you use quantum physics
to really jump into
a different reality,
to create on a different level,
and not create the same story
over and over?
>>WOLF: The thing
which is interesting is
that we are doing that, even
though we don't recognize
that we're doing that.
The thought or
the idea which has
you frozen in a
particular way of thinking
is being created,
recreated, recreated.
It becomes re-creation,
recreation.
It becomes your way of dealing.
And you're so much caught
in that circle or that web
of entanglement which keeps
you making the things appear
in the way that you feel
most comfortable with, even
though what you
call comfort for you
may be hell for somebody else.
We're constantly doing that.
And then we can work together.
We're not only just individuals.
We can share reality.
And each time we share reality,
the reality that I'm in
and the reality that you're in,
even though we're sharing it,
it's not the same.
We're in different
realities even right now.
It doesn't seem like it.
>>LISA: We may have
things in common,
but we have totally
different realities.
>>WOLF: We agree to
have things in common.
It's what we agree on that
makes a universe appear
to us as being out
there, independent of us.
But it never has been out
We're creating it all the time.
And the habits we
get into by the way
we do that creation creates the
situations we're in right now,
including all the chaos that's
going on in the world today.
>>LISA: Oh, that's
such an interesting--
so let's take two examples.
One's going to be simple, and
one's going to be more complex.
So take an example of a red car.
And you see the red car,
and I see the red car.
And the red car's on
television, and somebody's
advertising the red car, so
a collective group of people
see the red car.
Does the red car really exist?
>>WOLF: It exists
in the way it's
being observed by
every individual,
but it's not the same red car.
>>LISA: Hmm.
Could be slightly
purple to someone.
>>WOLF: In fact, the
red car that you see--
if we were to map out the
wavelength range over what
you call red, that you
call your red vision
and compare it with
mine, you would
see that we're not
seeing the same red.
Even red is different.
The sounds we make--
as I get older, my ability
to hear high-frequency sounds
has diminished quite a bit, so
I don't hear the same sounds
that I did when I was younger.
>>LISA: Different perspectives.
Yeah.
>>WOLF: So my reality of
sound, my sound reality
is very different from,
say, your sound reality.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>WOLF: Because you're
much younger than I am.
[LAUGH]
>>LISA: Well, it's different
perspectives, different-- yeah.
>>WOLF: It's a perspective.
It's also how we allow
the processes which
are taking place to occur.
And there's still
mysteries here.
I'm not trying to say I've
got everything explained.
>>LISA: That's quantum physics.
Yeah.
>>WOLF: But there's
still big mysteries
that need to be explained.
>>LISA: So then we go to the
more complex example, which
is chaos where
we're experiencing
the news or the politics
or different things that
are being said.
Everyone has a different
perspective on that.
However, events
are still occurring
that are being observed
by the collective
where you see a natural
disaster or you see a war zone.
Those are being experienced
by the collective,
so they're actually
happening, right?
>>WOLF: They are.
We are seeing them.
But the extent of those pictures
and how much they are actually
occurring in contrast
to the rest of the world
or the rest of even that
state or the rest of even
that country is
still a small part.
It's devastating
that we're seeing it,
but we're seeing
it much enlarged.
We're seeing it
much more exploded,
and so we are more affected
by the vision of it.
But you would think that
would make us care more,
but it also has the
opposite effect.
It makes us more
indifferent to it.
It's so much that, oh,
well, you know, all right.
So another guy got killed.
Who cares?
And that is also occurring.
So we're getting into--
some people are more
caring, but some people
are quite more indifferent, just
because we see it every day.
>>LISA: OK, so here's
where I'm going with this.
Can we change it?
>>WOLF: We can change it.
It's not quite clear how
to go about changing it.
>>LISA: Darn.
>>WOLF: So--
>>LISA: Get on it.
Come on.
We've got to figure this out.
[LAUGH]
>>WOLF: But the one thing is
that the way I would change it,
the way I believe
we have to change it
is through compassionate
understanding.
And that means instead of
looking at the person that
has a viewpoint opposite
to you as being an enemy,
you look at it as,
how can I understand
that person's point of view?
Can I put myself into that
person's point of view?
Just the thought of being
in another person's shoes
and looking out through their
eyes with the understanding
that they're not enemy,
but they're actually
trying to see the world, see
the world as they see it,
to try to see the
world as they see
it will give you
a more compassion
understanding of
what is going on.
>>LISA: Unless that person is
doing something to harm you,
then it's hard to
have compassion.
>>WOLF: You know, it
works even if somebody
is trying to harm you.
Compassion is bigger than just
only one thing, but not this.
You can be compassionate
for this, but not for that.
Compassion is bigger
than all that.
And the big thing that
quantum physics tells me
is that reality is
observer-created.
So we are creating
reality through the way
we go about observing.
So if you can change the
way you observe somebody
who is antagonistic
to you, you can
change your way of looking
at that person, that person's
viewpoint can also change.
They're opportunity because
see, there's the illusion
that we're each separate kind
of minds, but we're really not.
We're really not that separate.
And there's a field
of mind, a mind field.
And each of us through
the participation,
through all the various
different mechanisms
that come into
evolutionary wisdom
that we have called
bodies, we have
produced an illusion
of separateness,
but we're really one.
>>LISA: Yes.
It's interesting.
I love this slide
that you have about
that quantum physics
is like a wave.
And as you just explained,
you can either ride it,
or you can resist it.
And what you just said is
a perfect example of that.
You can ride the
wave of consciousness
and be the observer
and the observed,
and really be a part
of this quantum soup.
Or you can fight it and resist
it, and then what happens?
>>WOLF: Well, you get
washed to the side.
>>LISA: Or suffer.
>>WOLF: Unfortunately,
you suffer
more than you need to suffer.
And that's what a lot of
people are doing right now.
>>LISA: So true.
Yes, that is true.
So how then do you
really understand and go
on to the top of
that wave, Fred?
And how do you go with the
flow of quantum physics?
>>WOLF: The only way I know is
through compassion, that one
has to develop a compassionate
way of being in the world
with everybody that you
come in contact with.
Regardless of what the situation
you are finding yourself in,
you become compassionate
with the situation.
That's the only way I
know of dealing with it.
I don't think there is another
way of dealing with it.
>>LISA: Right.
I love your perspective
on compassion,
and I love your perspective on
how we can leap into compassion
and become the observer
all at the same time.
I'd love to learn
about this next slide
that you have on something
called complementarity?
>>WOLF: Complementarity, yes.
Let me tell you a
little bit about it.
It's a wonderful concept.
The idea was that how and
what you choose to observe,
how you go about
making the observation,
quantum physics has
shown us that when
we go about making
an observation,
the way we choose to
make that observation
creates a reality for us at
that moment, which is cut off,
chopped off from all of
reality, other than just
that particular
moment of observation.
If we decided to
do that observation
from a different perspective,
not trying to pin it down, not
make it into thing, but make it
into something complementarity
to thingness, which would
be compassion, for example,
then we go into
that mode of seeing.
And once we're in
that mode of seeing,
the choppiness into particleness
or into little objects
is no longer present.
They're complementary to each
other, wave and particle.
Get on the wave, you're
not on the particle.
Get on the particle,
you've lost the wave.
So that's the whole idea
of what the principle
of complementarity
is really all about.
And it seems to exist
in many, many places.
It's in our thinking.
We more or less intuitively know
what things are complementary
and what things are not.
Jungian psychology was one
of the first to develop,
I think, a way of
thinking about that
in terms of Jungian functions.
This is psychological
talk, I know, but we can--
>>LISA: What do
you mean by that?
>>WOLF: I'll get into that.
There are four basic functions
of mind, according to Jung.
Feeling, thinking,
sensing, intuiting.
These are the four functions.
And Jung often
noticed that people
seem to be developed more
or less with two of the four
strong and two of the four weak.
For example, it's
been suggested,
although it's not
true today, but it
used to be suggested that
women were feeling intuitives
and men were sensing thinkers.
(GRUFF VOICE) I want to
know what this is made of.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: I've got to
think about it somewhat.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: Whereas women,
intuitively, well, they
can see into the future.
They kind of feel
their way through it.
They're feelers.
>>LISA: Doesn't
really matter what
it's made of, as long as
you have a good time on it.
>>WOLF: So sometimes
we've isolated and called
that the feminine versus
masculine point of view.
But today, there
are plenty of women
that are quite adept
at sensing and thinking
and quite a few men that
are feeling intuitives.
I mean, the things have
kind of switched around.
So it's not a question of sex
that determines these things.
It's a question of choice
and how one behaves.
>>LISA: I would even
say that there are
many of us that have all four.
>>WOLF: There are.
But the interesting
thing about them
is that they are in
complementary pairs.
You can more or less feel
and intuit at the same time,
but you can't feel and
think at the same time.
You could try, but the
minute you start thinking,
your feelings go out.
I use the analogy
of making love.
You're making love and you're
having a wonderful time.
The feelings are whatever,
senses and feeling.
And suddenly you think about,
oh, this is a wonderful thing.
[GASP]
And it suddenly stops because
you put it into thought.
>>LISA: That happens with
intuition and meditation.
You can go have a great journey,
and then all of the sudden,
you're aware of
the body and you--
>>WOLF: Exactly.
>>LISA: --get sucked back.
Exactly.
This is the complementarity
that we are used to.
We're used to it.
In fact, that's where
these old cliches
about feeling and intuiting
versus sensing and thinking
began to develop.
So we're used to the
concept of complementarity.
And now we find that it's not
only true for the way the mind
and the body work,
but it also is
true for principles of physics.
>>LISA: So it's really
about the observer,
and it's about perspectives,
again, I'm going to say.
But perspectives
isn't a word that's
used a lot in quantum
physics, is it?
>>WOLF: Well, it is
in a certain sense.
It's what you bring to bear.
The perspective you take depends
on how you go about looking.
So how you decide to look at
that particular whatever, how
you choose to observe
is called a perspective.
And you can imagine
up a picture where
you're looking up
at a structure,
and it looks a certain way.
From another point of
view, you're looking down,
it looks very different.
So these are different
perspectives.
And if you're looking, say,
from above like in a city,
looking down at a
big city, you're
getting a perspective
of the whole.
And suddenly, the
individuals that you see
look more like ants to you.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Like from an
airplane's perspective.
Well, let's do this
little experiment.
So you have this
great slide here
that shows us
different perspectives.
>>WOLF: OK.
>>LISA: And I love this.
Can you explain this to us?
>>WOLF: What you
see on the screen
before you is what
you might call a box.
And you can see there are
two definite square faces
to the box.
There's a square face which
you might say is in front,
and a square face which you
might say is in the rear.
Or you might look
at it another way.
There's a square face which
is lower than the square face
which is a little bit higher.
But look at that
box for a while.
Let your mind sink
into it for a while,
and then try to decide
which of those square faces
is actually in
front of the other.
Is it the lower one in front
or the upper one in front?
And for some people who are--
I would call them more
sensing, thinker types--
it gets frozen one way or the
other, and doesn't ever change.
But for intuitive feeling
types, it starts to jump.
>>LISA: It's fluid.
>>WOLF: It jumps.
It actually goes, dap,
dap, dap, dap, dap, dap.
And if you watch that, if you're
watching it on home right now,
if you're watching
it right now, you
can find out what you are
by watching that picture
and seeing what happens to you.
>>LISA: Oh, that's great.
Yes.
I see the box fluid, coming
in and out, in and out.
>>WOLF: Yeah.
In and out.
Fluid is more or less a flow.
This is pop!
Pop!
It's quantum leap.
It's a jump.
It's like pixelated.
It's like quantum dots.
It's digitized.
It's not smooth, flowing.
Pop, pop, pop, pop, pop.
It's pop, pop, pop, pop, pop.
I call them pops, quantum pops.
>>LISA: That's great.
That's great.
>>WOLF: And that's
what you're observing.
Now the thing is, let's
say that you are seeing it
as a popping cube.
You're witnessing what would
be called a visual presentation
of a quantum leap.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>WOLF: This is what a
quantum leap is all about.
Now there's another
way of seeing this.
Let's just go to
a pure red screen.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: OK.
Now we're looking just red, OK?
Now suddenly we see
a blue square, OK?
Focus your mind on
that blue square.
Now a blue trapezoid appears.
Maybe another blue trapezoid,
and then a third one,
and then a fourth one.
And now we have a
bunch of trapezoids
surrounding a square.
Focus your mind on all of those
as we change the background
from red to blue, but
only keep your mind
on the actual
geometrical flat figures
that I mentioned to you before.
And now even though
the background
may have changed
blue, you're still
focusing on just
those flat pieces.
There is no jumping.
You're now in the
complementary space.
All you're seeing is flat pieces
pasted with a kind of red halo
glowing around it.
Just focus on it that way.
And then when you're ready,
just say to yourself, jump.
And the minute you
say jump, suddenly
it changes back into a cube.
And there it is doing its
jumping back and forth.
>>LISA: So this is how
we can do this in life.
We can change our
perspectives that fast.
This is so important.
It's important for shifting
into different states
of being, knowledge,
parallel universes,
creating, creating
our own reality,
law of attraction, all of that.
This is the quantum
physics of it.
>>WOLF: Yeah.
It's a question of focusing
in or unfocusing and looking
at the whole picture.
And those are complementary.
>>LISA: Yes.
So you can look
at any situation,
and you can see a quantum
jump from that situation.
How does this work with
parallel realities?
>>WOLF: Well, that's
a very good question.
Let's look at our
cube again, OK?
The notion that
there's a quantum leap
can be looked at as me saying
that in parallel worlds,
there are really
two perspectives.
And when you quantum
leap, in a sense,
you're kind of jumping from one
world into a parallel world.
But you're going with
it, so you don't really
notice that anything
has changed,
because more or less,
everything else around you
has kind of stayed the same.
So we're looking at that
from a point of view.
Now you can merge
the parallel worlds
when you see just the blue
pieces on the red background.
Now you're looking at the
parallel worlds merged.
But the minute you go into--
your jumping.
And every time you take
an option to choose
one or the other or have one
or the other appear before you,
you've entered into
a parallel reality.
And we do this so much
that we don't even
think of it in terms
of parallel realities.
But quantum physics
has indicated to us
that that is a way of
looking at what's going on.
It's just another
way of looking.
You don't have to necessarily
look at it that way,
but it may be
helpful to understand
that each of us by
the choices we make
enter into our own realities
parallel with others
where there's some agreement
as to what we can agree on.
And we may be able to
understand why there's
so much disagreement
when we understand
that we are looking at things
from different perspectives.
Different universes,
practically.
>>LISA: Universes.
And there's an infinite
amount of them, right?
>>WOLF: There's no ending.
>>LISA: That's the
important part.
So if there's an infinite
amount of parallel universes,
you and I could have a
conversation right here, right
now, and then we can,
in a parallel universe,
make a different choice,
a different decision,
and we will continue on
a different decision.
Say we decide to get
up and leave right now.
Yet there could
be this interview
still happening in
a different reality?
[LAUGH]
>>WOLF: Well--
--it's true, but the question
of how close those realities are
to each other is so vast that
in each reality, the one where
we separated from
each other, would
be so distinct from the
ones where we're still
in conversation that we would
not notice that we left,
that we had the other option.
Once that option is made
on such a grand scale
as the scale of having
this show and doing
what we're doing
right now, we wouldn't
be able to see the connection.
In quantum physics,
we do experiments
where we really nibble down
to very fine distinctions,
and it's there that we can
see these parallel realities.
We don't really see them
very well in large--
what I call macroscopic.
>>LISA: And how do you do it in
a micro way in quantum physics?
What types of studies?
>>WOLF: Well, that's an
interesting question.
Now, let's see if I can try
to explain it as best I can.
When you make an observation,
let's say of the cube--
let's say we do
that observation.
One way of looking at that
is an observation is made,
and you see the cube with
the lower face in front
and the upper face behind.
And if you had seen it
the other way around,
you would see it with the upper
face in front and the lower
face behind.
Imagine that those are
two parallel worlds,
and you're in each
of those worlds.
OK?
Imagine that for a moment.
And now imagine that
your consciousness
is able to grasp that both
pictures are possible,
and sees yourself holding onto
both pictures at the same time.
>>LISA: Like if they
were side by side.
>>WOLF: As if they
Just imagine that
you could see that.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: Now imagine,
if you will,
that you are able
to communicate what
you see to each of
your other alter egos
in each of the parallel worlds.
So in the world where you're
seeing lower face in front,
you're telling yourself, hey.
There's another viewpoint
that's also being seen.
I want you to know that.
Oh, really?
Wow.
There's another world.
Oh, there's another
way of looking at this.
Hey, wait a minute.
Maybe I can change.
And you do that in both worlds.
So in the quantum
physics experiment,
we do something similar
to what I just described
with atoms or molecules.
I mean, it's more tricky.
Actually, we do it with what I
call qubits, quantum computers.
And it's very difficult--
it's more technical
than I think we can get into.
But basically, it's that
idea of communicating
what is seen from the outside
to the individuals that are
in the inside points of view.
And that way, they
have a memory,
a memory of what is possible,
even though for them it's
not possible.
They don't think it's possible.
But now they know
it is possible,
because another
point of view exists.
>>LISA: It's been introduced.
>>WOLF: And that's
something we have
to do in the reality
we're in right now.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: Even though we
don't see it as possible,
we have to-- that's what
I mean about compassion.
You begin to open up yourself
to the other point of view that
is possible, even though you
don't have that view right now.
There's another
voice telling you,
>>LISA: It's possible.
Yes.
>>WOLF: It's possible.
And this means that
the idea of you
being just you has to
dissolve into there
is no such thing as just
a single I. Every I is
the same I in each of us.
>>LISA: That's complementarity.
>>WOLF: That's right.
>>LISA: So I love this,
because you have the quantum
perspective, and I'm
going to bring it
to a life kind of example.
So say, for example, you're
in one financial bracket,
and you know that there's a
possibility to make more money.
You see people
making more money.
You see successful people.
But you have this
reality that you are not,
and you can't pay your bills,
and you can't pay your rent.
You can go into
a quantum reality
where that exists, where you
are in that space of having
everything that you want and
being comfortable and being
taken care of and having that
financial abundance that you
desire.
And you can constantly
overlap that
and overlap, and really
share that reality.
But what happens when
the judgment comes in?
What does that do?
What does the judgment do?
>>WOLF: Well, let's
explain a little bit
about what we call judgment.
Judgment is really a
voice which is telling us,
you can't have that.
It's kind of a negation of
the dream kind of thing.
And the point is that
quantum physics gives us
not only the perspective
of, we can have something.
It also gives us the perspective
that we can't have something.
In other words, it's not
only one thing or the other.
It's both and rather
than either or.
So you deal with it
as you would deal
with any particular thought
process that you have.
You simply say, OK.
I hear that I can't have it, but
I also hear that I can have it.
Both perspectives keep in mind.
And the old saying goes, you
feed the idea which feeds you,
so to speak.
You don't feed the
guy that's trying
to defeat you, but feed the one
that's trying to support you.
So you go into the more positive
for yourself perspective.
>>LISA: That's what
visualization is.
>>WOLF: That's visualization.
Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
And you have a way of breaking
it down on how this all works.
We have another
slide here where you
have how we construct
the past, the quantum.
>>WOLF: Right.
Well, in this
particular slide, we
have a particle of
light, a photon.
And it enters what is called
a half silvered mirror.
It's coming in, say, like that.
And what happens is that
according to quantum physics,
it breaks up into
two possibilities.
I didn't say actualities.
It doesn't become two photons.
It's only two photon
ghost possibilities
that go on separate paths, and
then reflect off of mirrors
and come back together again.
And there's another
half silvered mirror
at the top of that diagram.
And if the two ghost
patterns are in phase
with each other, which
means they're vibratory
in the same way, then
those two ghost waves
will only reinforce
in one direction,
and you'll get a picture of
the photon, a pop appearing
in one of the collectors,
whereas if for some reason,
they're out of phase,
you can get one
popping or the other popping.
You get either one popping.
But if they're in phase, you
only get one of those popping.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: Now if you for
some reason take the--
remember that you have a
mirror which splits them apart.
Then you have a mirror that's
on top which joins them.
If you take that mirror out
and then you have the particle,
the ghost particles, which
so far, as far as you know,
are still on two possible
paths, yet either collector,
either observer, either one
of those collecting plates
or whatever you want to call
it will pop, but not both.
One or the other.
Now the question you
have in your mind
is given that one of
those or the other popped,
and there's no way to
add things together,
because there's no mirror
there to make that happen,
then you'd have to
say, well, how did that
mirror to the right pop?
The only way it
could have popped
is that the photon must
have only gone on one path.
It didn't split apart.
So it reflected, and
then went on one path.
But on the other hand,
if I put the mirror in,
then it had to go on both paths.
So mirror in, it's both paths.
Mirror out, it's one
path or the other.
So now the question is,
the light enters the tube,
and let's imagine the
tube is very long.
Let's say that light is coming
from Alpha Centauri, 4.3
light years away, whatever.
And the two ghost paths are
around some star in between
or something, whatever.
Galaxy in between so that now we
have two possible ghost paths.
And so now it's been traveling
4.3 light years, 4.3 years
to get from where it left.
And we have a little
mirror, a little tiny mirror
at the very end.
Put the mirror in, and it
has to go along both paths.
Take the mirror
out, it had to go
along one path and the other.
So we at the moment have
decided what the past
of that particle of light--
>>LISA: Oh, you're
explaining the past.
OK.
Can you put this in
a real term example,
like a real life example
of how that would work?
>>WOLF: Well, we
create the past.
>>LISA: Through our minds.
>>WOLF: Through our minds.
>>LISA: Every day.
>>WOLF: Every day.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: So we, by how
we choose to reflect--
quote, unquote,
"reflect--" about how
we got to where we got to
determines what possibilities
were open to us, or not.
If we choose that it
only was one way that we
got to where we got to--
(GRUFF VOICE) I got to where
I am by hard work and sweat,
and that's it, and I don't
care about anything else!
Then that's the only path
you had open to you, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: But if you begin to
realize that others were there
to help you, and there were
other paths open to you,
and there were many, many paths
that got you to where you got
to, then you have what I
call a more compassionate--
and we're right back
to that word again--
a more compassionate view of
how you get to be where you are.
It wasn't just you
that got you to be you.
It was a lot of others
And once you begin to see that,
you create a different path.
The path or the
past path, the path
of the past that you create--
hard work, hard
work, hard work--
puts you in a bind.
And that is your past.
That's what you see.
That's what you think
is your reality.
And anybody that tells
you that isn't true,
you think they're crazy,
they're misguided, whatever.
But the truth is, I got to
where I got to by my hard work.
>>LISA: Right.
But you can look at it--
you can come at it from two
different perspectives.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
And you create the past.
>>LISA: Yes.
OK.
So along those
same lines, when we
are creating an image
of the past, what
happens when we're going into
the future and we have doubt,
we have worry, we have fear?
>>WOLF: OK.
Let's look at it from a point of
view of what we call a quantum
field idea, OK?
In the quantum
field theory, which
seems to be the best theory we
have going right now to explain
a lot of basic understanding
at the submicroscopic level,
there are fields,
quantum fields.
And what we call
events or particles
are things that
pop in the field.
They're like excitations.
They're like little bubbles of
froth on the ocean wave, OK?
And the picture we
have is that there
are, between any two events
separated in space or time,
there are multiple
paths connecting those.
Many ways of getting there.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>WOLF: So that's basically
the quantum field.
Now in terms of
our everyday life,
we have to understand that
both the past and the present
or the present
and the future are
from the point of
view of quantum fields
already in existence.
>>LISA: That's fascinating.
>>WOLF: They're already there.
We're just finding out about it.
You've got to think of it as
time is like a river flowing.
And it's just flowing by,
flowing by, flowing by.
And we are in the river with
it, so we're flowing with it.
OK?
But if we get out of the
river and stand on the shore,
we can look ahead and see
where the river's going to be.
We can see where the river was.
We can see both the past and--
the quantum field point of
view is being on the side,
looking at the
past and the future
of the river at the same time.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: OK?
So that's the perspective.
Now what happens is that when
there is an idea, desire,
something that you want that
connects these two events,
then what happens is that not
only is there something which
travels forward from your
point of view through time,
but there's also something
which comes back.
So if you have the thought,
I want to make this happen,
I believe this is good,
there's also the thought, well,
what if you don't do it right?
So doubt is also a message
that you can receive,
because the movement
is both ways.
You can look to the past.
You can look to the--
you can see both.
>>LISA: That's how we
create our reality.
>>WOLF: So our realities
come into vision that way.
Now we can also do it
the other way around.
We may have the vision of
focusing, oh, we can't do that.
But then it comes back in
message, oh, yes, you can.
So doubt is always
going to be present.
Doubt is part of the parcel.
It's part of a picture.
It's part of the
whole bag of tricks
that we have to deal with.
And it's a question of,
let it be, because it's
healthy to have doubt.
But if you go with the
doubt, you never do anything.
>>LISA: Right.
Right.
I mean, for fatalistic thinking
and people that really always
look at the worst
case scenario, they're
going to create that,
because they never
have the opposite strain
or string that comes in.
>>WOLF: They stay always--
they're in the
skeptical land view.
In the skeptical land view--
I don't know how to
put their perspective--
they're kind of
caught in the stream.
And--
[LAUGH]
>>LISA: Yeah.
I mean, I know
someone like this,
and they constantly create
the worst case scenario.
>>WOLF: The worse case scenario.
That's right.
>>LISA: Constantly.
>>WOLF: So they're
always thinking
about what bad things are
going to happen to them.
>>LISA: And it always happens,
because when I say, why do you
always go to the worst case
scenario, they say, well,
you've got to be aware.
You've got to understand.
You've got to know that these
things are going to happen.
But what you're
saying is, there's
another reality
that can come in.
It's good to be aware, but
enter in this reality of--
>>WOLF: There's also the
opposite of the doubt.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: So whatever you're
doubting, turn it upside down
or around and see, what
is it that could happen
that is not within the doubt?
Whatever it is.
Whatever you're doubting.
>>LISA: Byron Katie's
"The Work" I think of.
She has this turnaround.
So what if it wasn't that way?
How would it be?
And this is a great
thing for visualization,
to see things the way
you want them to be.
>>WOLF: It's seeing things
the way you want them to be.
And there's another very
important part of this.
We're in material form.
We're not just
pixelated dots, even
though that's what we're
coming to in virtual reality.
But we have to get up and move.
[LAUGH]
Once we have the picture,
let's do something about it.
Let's not just sit there
and hope for the best.
Move along the path
which takes you there.
Walk your talk, so to speak.
Move along the path
which takes you there.
You can also move along
the path which you doubt.
I doubt it's going
to happen, so I'm
going to do everything I can to
make sure that doesn't happen.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That's the difference
between how and who.
I've heard it said,
well, how do we do this?
How do we do this?
Instead of moving into,
who can help us do this?
>>WOLF: Yes.
>>LISA: It takes the how
of the idea of the quantum,
and then it brings in
the action piece which
is, who can actually help
you do something or help you?
>>WOLF: Yes.
Yes.
Absolutely.
>>LISA: So this is a
great conversation,
because we're talking about
everything from quantum fields,
parallel reality, string theory,
essentially, entanglement,
everything.
[LAUGH]
>>WOLF: We haven't
got to strings yet.
>>LISA: Oh, we haven't--
we're talking about different--
>>WOLF: Talking about
the quantum fields.
>>LISA: OK.
So now in the quantum field,
you can recreate your past,
essentially, by changing
your perspective
on where the river has gone.
>>WOLF: In order to
do that, you have
to come out of the
river, so to speak,
and be able to look back.
And it's a question of how
you do that looking back.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: In other words,
the river's flowing.
So whenever you're
looking back, the past
is constantly being
recreated all the time,
because the river's flowing.
It's flowing.
What's back there?
Oh, what's back there?
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
Yes.
Now how does string
theory relate to anything
that we're talking about?
I know that's not--
[LAUGH]
--a slide.
>>WOLF: Well, it is
the, I would say,
the last vestige of
the mechanical world
view that we physicists
in particular
are trying to develop.
The one thing about everything
we've talked about so far
is we've left off the
most common thing we all
experience called gravity.
And when you try to put gravity
and quantum physics together,
it becomes a mess.
They don't jive.
They don't work quite
together the right way.
People have been modeling
that with all kinds
of interesting ideas, and
some of them are fascinating.
But the one that started
developing about 30,
40, 50 years ago--
I'm not sure exactly when--
something called
string theory, which
said that there are
not point particles.
There are strings.
Each so-called particle
is made of strings.
And these are not just-- they're
vibrating energy strings.
So they're energy vibrations.
So in a way, it's not particle.
It's energy vibrations.
But Einstein says
e equal mc squared,
so energy and
matter are the same.
So if energy is there, there's
got to be matter there,
so to speak.
So that's the basis
of string theory.
It's very complicated.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's a great, great example.
Yes.
>>WOLF: Yes.
I mean, I've given you just
the real basic aspect of it.
And there are some interesting
things that come about.
I mean, such that gravity
can be incorporated.
But it requires
extra dimensions.
I think 11, 12, 17.
I don't know how
many there are now.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm Yes.
Yes.
Have they actually
been discovered?
>>WOLF: No, because
they're too small.
These extra dimensions
are curled up.
It's like we have spaghetti, and
you tightly wind the spaghetti
around in very, very,
very, very tight curls,
and they're so tight that
as far as you can see,
you can't see them
anymore, and it just
looks like a straight line.
It's like somebody wound
spaghetti up into a corkscrew,
and it's so fine that it just--
you can't see the ups and
downs of the corkscrew.
All you can see is
a straight line.
>>LISA: It's interesting,
because quantum physics
explains so much of how
we live and what we do
and how we create.
And yet, there are so
many great experiments
that are done now that
explain the unexplainable.
There are these
double blind, and they
recreate these experiments
over and over and over again
where you can
affect consciousness
and different
localities, where you
can have different tracks
going on at the same time.
There are so many
great experiments.
Are you involved in
anything right now?
>>WOLF: No, nothing like that.
Those are more, I think,
probably somebody else
you might want to
have on the show.
Dean Radin is a
fine scientist who's
been investigating what is
formerly called, in the past,
parapsychology.
I don't know what he
would call it today.
Might have a
different term for it.
>>LISA: What are
your interests now?
What are you moving into?
>>WOLF: That's a good question.
[LAUGH]
What I'm interested in right
now is something called context
duality.
The question is, is what we
observed, what we observe,
affected by the background
in which it is observed?
In other words, is
there an objective--
if I observe something
one way, is it always
going to be that way?
Or does my observation depend
upon what others have observed?
>>LISA: So say we're
looking at this cup.
>>WOLF: Yes.
>>LISA: And we want
to observe this cup.
You're talking about
the field around it?
>>WOLF: The table, the
flowers, everything around it.
The question is, if I observe
the cup and I only see the cup,
is what I see of the cup going
to change depending upon what
environment that cup is in?
>>LISA: Yes.
[LAUGH]
>>WOLF: And so the whole
idea of contextual--
we used to think that in
so-called classical physics
that things were non-contextual.
A ball is a ball is
a ball is a ball.
Red is red is red.
Non-contextual.
It didn't matter what
other colors were there,
but we all sort of learned
that even observation of color
changes depending on background.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>WOLF: So obviously,
contextuality
does affect what
we call reality.
So the context duality
of political thinking
affects how we think today.
So all these things
are based upon what
I call context duality.
So my interest has been in,
how to explain context duality?
The other things which
interests me is, how do we
explain how do we explain?
>>LISA: Wait, wait.
I want to go there for a sec.
But what you were
just talking about
is along the lines
of epigenetics, yes?
>>WOLF: I don't know.
What is epigemetics?
>>LISA: Epigenetics.
[LAUGH]
>>WOLF: What is it?
I'm not sure what it is.
>>LISA: It's where the
environment creates the--
it affects the cells or
what's happening in the body.
So you can actually be--
>>WOLF: Well, that's part of it.
That's part of it.
But we're more dealing
here with observation.
In other words,
is what I observe
of something going to change--
if I keep observing exactly
the same way all the time,
but put it in a different
context, will it change?
And the answer seems to be
under certain cin-- circun--
>>LISA: Stances.
>>WOLF: --certain circumstances
it will actually change.
And so there's a context--
quantum physics is indicated,
there is definitely
a contextual aspect to it.
What this is leading
to is that the world
is more mental than physical.
There's more of a
mental aspect to it.
And that's what I think
this is leading to.
So that's kind of the
direction I've gotten into.
And you asked me
what my interest was.
Along with that are questions
that come up in subjects
we call ontology
and epistemology.
Ontology is, what's
really out there?
Epistemology is, what do we
think is really out there?
OK?
So there's two different
ways of thinking.
Quantum physics has taken
epistemology and ontology,
which were quite well separated
in most people's minds,
and jumbled them up
into kind of an omelet.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yeah.
>>WOLF: One, physicist
Julian Jaynes,
made that picture of that.
So we can no longer say that
what we think about and--
what we think is really
there and what is really
there are really things
that can be separated.
They're no longer separable.
And this is what quantum physics
has brought into picture.
So this led me to thinking
about a lot of different things.
There is a school of thought
that a German mathematician
who spent a lot of time
with Einstein at Princeton--
Kurt Godel-- G-O-D-E-L, with an
umlaut over the O, Kurt Godel--
he came up with the
principle of undecidability.
And he said that a system
even like arithmetic,
which everybody understands,
it's possible to make
statements about arithmetic
which cannot be proven under
the laws of arithmetic.
They're undecidable.
They seem to be
true, but we can't
prove by the principles of--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: I mean, for
example, there's
some things we can easily prove.
2 plus 2 is 4.
We can easily prove that.
That's within the
principles of arithmetic.
But there are other principles
which we cannot prove.
I don't want to get--
>>LISA: As you get more into
mathematics and deeper into it.
>>WOLF: Gets more into
logic of mathematics.
>>LISA: Logic, yes.
>>WOLF: And so then it got me
thinking about, well, we're
into quantum physics.
Is it possible that
quantum physics
is itself capable of producing
statements about itself which
are unprovable?
>>LISA: Of course.
>>WOLF: So if that's
the case, then we're
really into a mental world.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: The world cannot
be-- fundamentally,
it cannot be physical.
It has to be mental.
>>LISA: Well, I mean,
it's interesting.
You apply what you're
talking about to everything
from fake news to
propaganda to fear.
And you can really
look at that and you
could say, what is
reality, and what is not?
And how much are we being
involved with the context of it
and impacted by the context
of it and what is real?
And I think that is happening
in our society today.
We really need to more
than ever determine
our own truth, which is why
this show is so important.
Yes.
I think it's really important.
I have to ask you, what
is your biggest why?
Why do you do what you do, Fred?
[LAUGH]
>>WOLF: Well, my biggest
why isn't anything about me.
It's more about, why is there
something rather than nothing?
Why is there anything at all?
And why is there
an I-ness which is
capable of even asking
such a question as,
why is there something
rather than nothing?
Where does that all come from?
And to me, that's
the big mystery.
That's the mystery
I've lived my life by.
It's made me a very
curious person.
And it's one which continually
drives my introspection
and my outerspection
into inquiring
into the nature of what might
be called, quote, unquote,
"reality."
>>LISA: Right.
What is reality, anyway?
OK.
So we've talked about a lot
of specific topics here.
How do we apply what
we've learned today
in quantum physics to this
chaotic, crazy world we
live in?
How do we really utilize it?
>>WOLF: The way we
utilize it is to realize
that what you call an observer
is not a fixed thing, that you
yourself are capable of changing
what you mean by I. Your
I is not a fixed thing.
The I-- this is what
quantum physics tells us.
It's the observer
that has to change.
By changing the
observer, you create
and you change the reality.
>>LISA: And you
change your past,
and you change your future,
and you change everything.
>>WOLF: Yeah.
Let's say you have a
significant other in your life,
and that significant other
could be another person who
is your same age, a younger
person, an older person,
whatever.
How do you bring your
I-ness to that person?
How do you make that
observation of that person?
How you do think when
you are with that person
about that person?
If you change how you
think about that person,
if you change who is thinking
about this other person,
if you just ask yourself
the question, who am I,
or who is thinking
about this other person,
just asking that question to
yourself will change the way
you make the observation
of the other person.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: And what'll
happen is the other person
will begin to see
something different.
Just you-- you don't
have to even say a word.
You just in your
mind say to yourself,
who's asking about this
other person opposite me?
Who am I?
>>LISA: Yes.
A great example of that.
>>WOLF: If you don't
answer the question--
opposite.
You answer the question.
I am this other person's wife,
husband, father, mother, son,
daughter, enemy, friend.
Once you answer the
question in your mind,
you automatically
put on interaction
with that person in which that
person is going to psychically,
intuitively, in some way pick up
and will behave in relationship
with your way of observing.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WOLF: And that is
what you need to do.
So what quantum physics tells
us, change the observer.
How do you change the observer?
Ask yourself the question,
who is observing?
Just ask.
Don't answer.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WOLF: If you
answer, you get caught
in a framework in which
you define the relationship
in which you are in.
>>LISA: That's important.
So if I am relating to my
daughter, I just say, I am--
>>WOLF: Don't even ask--
just say, who is with
this other person?
Don't even think of the
other person as daughter.
Don't label the other person.
Just-- there's
another being there.
>>LISA: Who am I?
>>WOLF: What am I?
Who am I?
Don't answer.
Just be with the person
without labeling yourself.
The other person might
get uncomfortable
and start labeling.
Well, Mom, what are you doing?
What are you talk--
>>LISA: That's presence.
>>WOLF: Be present.
Let her do it.
But just stay with--
>>LISA: OK.
How do we use that
with the news,
when we're watching the news?
>>WOLF: Well, watch the news
and watch it, but don't get
caught up with it.
It's the river flowing past you.
Think of it as flowing past you.
Don't get caught with the river.
Most of us get caught
with the river.
Oh, those dirty guys.
They did that.
Why does the president do that?
Why does-- da, da, da,
da, da, da, da, da, da.
Don't get caught in the river.
Let the river flow.
News comes in, it goes out.
It's like watching a TV drama.
>>LISA: Yeah, it is a drama.
So you just become the observer.
>>WOLF: Observe without labeling
what or who you think you are.
Don't fixate on a
particular point of view.
Let it flow.
Open the gates.
Don't label yourself as being
a Democrat, a Republican.
>>LISA: I know, it's
so counterintuitive.
I'm just thinking of all
the marketing out there.
Everyone wants to
put you in a hole--
>>WOLF: Exactly.
Exactly.
>>LISA: Grab your eyeballs.
>>WOLF: Exactly.
That's exactly what
marketers are trying to do.
They're trying to label you.
And that's exactly
what they're doing.
Oh, this person likes--
>>LISA: Identify.
Mm-hmm.
>>WOLF: What are you
going to identify with.
So if you can get out
of that identity--
[LAUGH]
>>LISA: That's great.
>>WOLF: It just passes by you.
>>LISA: I love that.
If we could live our
lives as the observer,
it would be such
a peaceful planet.
>>WOLF: Well, that's essentially
the great spiritual teaching.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
Yes.
>>WOLF: And that is what
quantum physics tells us.
Be the living observer
without defining
the ways in which
the observer goes
about making the observation.
Just witness it all without
attaching ourself to it.
>>LISA: Non-attachment.
Well, you are an observer
here, and thank you
for observing the show.
I really appreciate it.
If you'd like to see more
inspirational programming,
you can go to
"Inspirations" on gaia.com.
I'm Lisa Garr, and
until next time,
I invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]